---
layout: post
title: "Problem Set 1 (alpha version)"
date:  2017-02-07 01:02:00 -0500
---
\\(
\DeclareMathOperator*\argmax{argmax}
\\)

### Due Monday, Feb. 13 on Blackboard. Please follow the general [guidelines](https://cos495.github.io/general/2017/02/06/homework-guidelines.html) regarding homework assignments.

### Theoretical exercises

1. Let $$x_{1},…,x_{N}$$ be $$N$$ boolean variables, taking on the values 0 or 1. 
   - Consider the conjunction $$\bar{x}_{1}\wedge\bar{x}_{2}\cdots\wedge\bar{x}_{n}\wedge x_{n+1}\wedge\cdots\wedge x_{N}$$ in which the first $$n$$ variables are negated. Express this function as an LT neuron $$H\left(\sum_{i}w_{i}x_{i}-\theta\right)$$ with weights $$w_{i}$$ and threshold $$\theta$$, where $$H$$ is the Heaviside step function. Note that conjunction, or AND, is defined by $$x_{1}\wedge\cdots\wedge x_{N}=1\text{ if and only if }x_{i}=1\text{ for all }i$$

   - Do the same for the disjunction $$\bar{x}_{1}\vee\bar{x}_{2}\cdots\vee\bar{x}_{n}\vee x_{n+1}\vee\cdots\vee x_{N}$$. Note that disjunction, or OR, is defined by $$x_{1}\vee\cdots\vee x_{N}=1\text{ if and only if }x_{i}=1\text{ for some }i$$

2. Logistic regression. The delta rule was first introduced in class using the LT neuron, which has a binary output.  Then we learned that variants of the delta rule can be derived for a model neuron with a smooth, analog activation function $$f$$.  The variant depends on what *loss function* is used to measure the deviation between desired and actual outputs.  If the desired output $$y$$ is binary (0 or 1), and the activation function ranges from 0 to 1, then some people like to interpret the output of the model neuron as the probability of a biased coin. These probability-lovers like to use the "log loss",
$$
e\left(\vec{w},\vec{x},y\right)=-y\log f\left(\vec{w}\cdot\vec{x}\right)-\left(1-y\right)\log\left[1-f\left(\vec{w}\cdot\vec{x}\right)\right]
$$
  - Derive the version of the delta rule $$(\Delta\vec{w}=?)$$ that results from online gradient descent using the above “log loss”.
  - Specialize to the case where the activation function is given by the logistic function $$f(u)=1/(1+e^{-u})$$.  You will get a simple result.
  - How does this differ from the version of the delta rule derived in class from the squared error loss function?
 
3. Delta rule for a layer of multiple neurons. Suppose that there are $$k$$ LT neurons, which all share the same $$n$$ inputs.  The $$k$$ weight vectors of the neurons are the rows of a $$k\times n$$ matrix $$W$$. The desired output $$\vec{y}$$ and bias $$\vec{b}$$ are $$k\times 1$$ vectors, and the input $$\vec{x}$$ is an $$n\times 1$$ vector. The goal of supervised learning is to find $$W$$ and $$\vec{b}$$ such that this approximation holds:
\\[
\vec{y}\approx H\left(W\vec{x}+\vec{b}\right).
\\]
Here the Heaviside step function $$H$$ has been extended to take a vector argument, simply by applying it to each component of the vector.  We could write $$k$$ separate delta rules, one for each of the LT neurons.  As a notational exercise, instead write the delta rule in matrix-vector format.

4. Multiclass training with softmax. We could train multiple LT neurons with separate delta rules to classify digits. Alternatively, there are various multiclass training methods.  For example, define the softmax function from $$R^{n}$$ to $$R^{n}$$ by 
   \\[
   f_{i}(u_{1},\ldots,u_{n})=\frac{e^{u_{i}}}{\sum_{j=1}^{n}e^{u_{j}}}
   \\]
  - Show that the gradient of the softmax function is: 
    \\[
    \frac{\partial f_{i}}{\partial u_{j}}=f_{i}\delta_{ij}-f_{i}f_{j}
    \\]
  - If any input vector $$\vec{x}$$ falls into $$1$$ of $$n$$ classes, we can represent the correct class for any input vector through an $$n$$-dimensional output vector with one-hot or unary encoding: 
    \\[
    y_{i} =
    \begin{cases}
    1, & i=\text{correct class}\cr
    0, & \text{otherwise}
    \end{cases}
    \\]
    Suppose we would like to train $$n$$ weight vectors $$\vec{w}_{1},\ldots,\vec{w}_{n}$$ so that 
    \\[
    y_{i}\approx f_{i}(\vec{w}_1\cdot\vec{x},\ldots,\vec{w}_n\cdot\vec{x})
    \\]
    Derive online gradient descent for the cost function 
    \\[
    e(\vec{w}_1,\ldots,\vec{w}_n,\vec{x},y_1,\ldots y_n) = - \sum_i y_i\log f_i(\vec{w}_1\cdot\vec{x},\ldots,\vec{w}_n\cdot\vec{x})
    \\]


### Programming exercises

The MNIST dataset was created at AT&T Bell Labs in the 1990s by selecting from and modifying a larger dataset from NIST. It consists of images of handwritten digits, and was heavily used in machine learning research in the 1990s and 2000s.  [Documentation](http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/) about the dataset can be found at Yann LeCun's personal website.

If you are using your own computer, download the sample code and start the Jupyter notebook using the commands
   <div class="highlighter-rouge"><pre class="highlight"><code>$ git clone https://github.com/cos495/code.git
   $ cd code
   $ julia
   julia> Pkg.add("IJulia")
   julia> using IJulia
   julia> notebook()</code></pre></div>
**IJulia** is the Julia flavor of the Jupyter notebook. If it doesn't install properly, you may have to consult the IJulia [documentation](https://github.com/JuliaLang/IJulia.jl).

If you are using JuliaBox, point your browser to juliabox.com.  Select "Sync" in the toolbar, type `https://github.com/cos495/code.git` into the box under "Git Clone URL", and press the "+" button on the right. Now select "Jupyter" in the toolbar.  

Either of these methods should open the Jupyter Notebook Dashboard in your browser.   The `code` folder should appear in the list of files. (If it doesn't, select the "Files" tab and/or refresh the page.) Select it, and then select `MNIST-Intro.ipynb`. The notebook should open in your browser.

2. Intro to MNIST
   - Execute the code in the notebook cells to visualize the MNIST images and their statistical properties. (No work to submit here.)
   
   - Write code to compute the pixelwise standard deviation of the images in each digit class.  (You can start from the provided code for the pixelwise mean of the images in each digit class. Use `std` to compute standard deviation.)
   
   - For each digit class, visualize the standard deviation as an image. Use the provided `montage` function. 


3. Classifying MNIST images with an LT neuron.  Return to the Notebook Dashboard and select `DeltaRule.ipynb`.
   - The sample code trains an LT neuron to be activated by images of “two” while remaining inactive for images of other digits. When you run the code, you should see time-varying images of the weight vector, and the input vector.  You will also see a learning curve, defined as the cumulative time average of the classification error versus time.  What is the final value of this time-averaged classification error?
   
   - In class we derived the loss function for the LT neuron delta rule.  Modify the code so that it additionally plots another learning curve, the cumulative time average of the loss function versus time.
   
   - Write code to run the trained LT neuron on the test set of images. The weight vector of the trained LT neuron should be frozen, and not learn during this evaluation of test error. Run the code, and report the average classification error on the test set.

   - What would be the error rate of the trivial recognition algorithm that always returns an output of 0?

4. Now replace the Heaviside step function of the LT neuron with a logistic function.  

   - Write code to train using by online gradient descent on the squared error loss function. 
   
   - Plot two learning curves, the cumulative time average of the classification error versus time, and the cumulative time average of the squared error loss versus time.
   
4. We can train 10 LT neurons to detect the 10 digit classes by applying the delta rule to each one.  

   - Modify the code in the `DeltaRule` notebook to train 10 LT neurons to recognize all 10 digit classes. Use the "one-hot" representation for the output: the $$i$$th component $$y_{i}=1$$ if the input $$\vec{x}$$ belongs to the $$i$$th digit class, while all other components are zero. We'll use the convention that the class of “zero”s corresponds to $$i=10$$. (Note: You could simply add an outer loop around the `DeltaRule` code for the different digit classes. Don't do this, as it's more revealing to code the updates in the matrix form that you have derived.) 

   - Your code should monitor the classification error on the training set.  What error rate does it achieve?
   
   - Your code should visualize the ten learned weight vectors displayed as images. 

   - If all the LT neurons were performing perfectly, only a single one would be active for each image. In reality, the number of active neurons is often greater or less than one. If we want the neurons to collectively choose a single digit class, we can keep their weight vectors and biases but replace the Heaviside step function with:
$$
     \argmax_{a}\left\{ \vec{w}_{a}\cdot\vec{x}+b_{a}\right\}
$$
where the maximum with respect to $$a$$ runs over the 10 neurons. Write code to evaluate the error of this “winner-take-all” classifier on the training and test sets. What are the error values?

5. (This is optional)  Write code for multiclass training of 10 neurons using the softmax training derived above.

